# MSL
MSL is a dynamic-type OOP programming language for personal usage

This project is a pure-C/C++ compiler for MSL, and VM for running it

## Compile your first program
To compile yout first program, firstly you should pass source code to MSL::compiler::StreamReader class:
```cpp
ifstream file("main.msl");
MSL::compiler::StreamReader reader;
reader.ReadToEnd(file);
file.close();
```
StreamReader reads file and removes data that should not be compiled (comments, extra spaces, tabs, empty lines) and also replaces string constants with unique identifiers. 

We can get buffer with source code from StreamReader using GetBuffer() method and pass it to Lexer class, which separate program into tokens:
```cpp
MSL::compiler::Lexer lexer(reader.GetBuffer());
lexer.ReplaceStrings(reader.GetReplacedStrings());
```
Notice that by now string constants are still not exist in lexer token array, so we need to replace them using Lexer::ReplaceStrings() method. All strings can be easily get using StreamReader::GetReplacedStrings() method from StreamReader object.

By now Lexer object contains all necessary information to Parse out program. For that we use MSL::compiler::Parser class:
```cs
MSL::compiler::Parser parser(&lexer, &cout, MSL::compiler::Parser::Mode::FULL_TRACE);
parser.Parse();
```
parser accepts lexer class object as a first parameter, output stream as a second parameter and output mode as a third parameter.

Lexer object is used to retrieve tokens of source program. Note that parser begins reading tokens from current lexer iterator position, so if you made any changes to lexer instance before, call lexer::ToBegin() method and only then start parsing program.

Output stream is used by parser to output any information: errors, warnings, debug messages and etc. If you do not want to get any additional information from parser, set outputStream to nullptr and mode to Parser::Mode::NO_OUTPUT:
```cpp
MSL::compiler::Parser parser(&lexer, nullptr, MSL::compiler::Parser::Mode::NO_OUTPUT);
```
Parser mode specifies which information should be outputted by parser. You can combine different masks using byte-or operator ( | ) or use one of pre-defined constants:

- NO_OUTPUT - parser does not output any information to provided stream
- ERROR_ONLY - only errors are outputted
- WARNING_ONLY - only warnings are outputted
- DEBUG_ONLY - only debug information are outputted (added methods, classes, etc.)
- NO_STACKTRACE - force parser to output only the first line where error occured
- NO_DEBUG - output everything except debug information
- FULL_TRACE - output any information generated by parser

The state of parser can be get using ParsingSuccess() method. Note that if parser did not find Main method, only warning is generated, so be sure to check if Main function defined in the file by calling Parser::HasEntryPoint() method
```cpp
if (parser.ParsingSuccess() && parser.HasEntryPoint())
{
  // program assembly can be safely pulled
}
```
The last thing you need to do with your MSL code is to generate executable bytecode file. There is no way to directly pass Assembly from parser to the VM class as it cannot directly work with AST representation, so the CodeGenerator should be created:
```cpp
// generate bytecode from parsed assembly
MSL::compiler::Assembly assembly = parser.PullAssembly();
MSL::compiler::CodeGenerator generator(assembly);
generator.GenerateBytecode();

// write bytecode to the binary file
ofstream binary(fileName + ".emsl", ios::binary);
std::string bytecode = generator.GetBuffer();
binary.write(bytecode.c_str(), bytecode.size());
```
GenerateBytecode() writes MSL-bytecode to the CodeGenerator inner buffer in a binary format. This buffer is simply a string and can be easily written to a file (as in our example). If you have done all steps correctly and see no errors, this means that you have successfully compiled your MSL program to bytecode language.

Full program (supposing that main.msl file located in the same folder with the program):
```cpp
#include "streamReader.h"
#include "lexer.h"
#include "codeGenerator.h"
#include "bytecodeReader.h"
#include "parser.h"

int main()
{
    ifstream file("main.msl");
    MSL::compiler::StreamReader reader;
    reader.ReadToEnd(file);
    file.close();
    
    MSL::compiler::Lexer lexer(reader.GetBuffer());
    lexer.ReplaceStrings(reader.GetReplacedStrings());
    
    MSL::compiler::Parser parser(&lexer, &cout, MSL::compiler::Parser::Mode::FULL_TRACE);
    parser.Parse();
    
    if (parser.ParsingSuccess() && parser.HasEntryPoint())
    {
        // generate bytecode from parsed assembly
        MSL::compiler::Assembly assembly = parser.PullAssembly();
        MSL::compiler::CodeGenerator generator(assembly);
        generator.GenerateBytecode();

        // write bytecode to the binary file
        ofstream binary("main.emsl", ios::binary);
        std::string bytecode = generator.GetBuffer();
        binary.write(bytecode.c_str(), bytecode.size());
    }
    return 0;
}
```

## Writing Hello World in MSL
First program that you usually want to write to test new language and its compiler is a simple "Hello World!" program. In MSL this program will look like:
```cs
// main.msl file
namespace Program
{	
    internal class ProgramClass
    {			
        public static function Main()
        {
            System.Console.PrintLine("Hello World!");
        }
   }
}
```
